---
layout: post
title:  "What if We Change Our Approach to Building Meaningful Products?"
date:   2019-10-21 14:45:11 +0200
categories: jekyll update
---

Today, manifesting brilliant ideas for important and meaningful innovative products is usually more expensive than it could be. One of the reasons for that is that it oftentimes implies the setup of a startup. And doing a startup is in most cases actually quite inefficient in terms of the overall resource management. People need to create a legal entity, secure funding, recruit a team, set up an organizational framework, gain expertise in a domain… Basically, build an entire infrastructure that then eventually allows them to start focusing on the actual product development. In other words, a talented creative or product person has to at least acquire some mediocre skills for things that are not directly related to the product itself. Hence, it increases the risk of failure disproportionally and consequently, makes innovation more expensive.

So, how can we change that? And how can we activate more outstanding talent, independent of domicile, that could finally bring its potential world-changing ideas into existence and would no longer be restricted by external factors?
One way to address these problems might be by rethinking the whole notion of how products are developed. What if there’s no need for creatives and product people to spend any energy on things that are not essential to the development process? Instead, they are provided with all the things that enables them to focus. Imagine the capacity that gets freed and, therefore, can be committed to the product instead. It’s not that unlikely that you’d be able to save about 50% or even more of the time when pursuing your endeavor. For those of you who have been involved in startups before: how much of your time were you able to actually devote to product per week? 

Another interesting effect of freeing creators of business duties is that we also open gates for people who wouldn’t have had the opportunity to work on their ideas with the same resources beforehand. So, we enable the participation of more gifted creatives. And we could potentially also solve the domicile problem. Cause highly talented creator communities exist across all continents. But not everywhere is the ecosystem in favor of entrepreneurial aspiration and activities (i.e. lack of know-how, funding, corruption, etc.). By offering these communities a platform that leverages their ideas and skills, they can bring their products to market anyway.

As an analogy to what I think of, think of the concept that the modern content studios such as HBO, Netflix, and Amazon have developed. When you want to make a movie, you don’t need to first create an entire movie studio yourself and make all the painful learnings others have been going through before you. Instead, you just make use of a highly functional base infrastructure and concentrate on executing on your vision for your movie. Should you need any help on the fly, you simply make use of provided resources and expertise. I think we can replicate that model for product development as well.

So, what creatives and product people are supposed to receive is a full suite of company infrastructure including a legal framework to operate from, funding, leadership, HR, technology, analytics, design, marketing, sales & distribution channels, a pool of experts from fields like legal, pricing, IP, among other things. By creating ever shorter feedback loops, such an infrastructure gets more and more valuable as the process of launching new products get easier to repeat over time. This in turn, attracts greater and greater talent. A group of people obsessed with product. Because again… The focus is really on the product. Not on a company. Yet, some of the products might be turned into a standalone company at some point later on. And some might not. All in all, potentially a somewhat new and interesting framework that allows for a more efficient creation of products that change our lives for the better.
